Once around the relay 2 affair.
So back in 2024, astronomers in
Australia picked up a very strange but
quite powerful radio signal in the band
of around 700 megahertz to a,000
megahertz, one gigahertz. And it was so
bright it was outshining everything in
the sky at the time.
Very exciting. This was uh suspected to
be some new astronomical phenomenon.
According to Clancy James, associate
professor at the uh radio astronomy
observatory there in Western Australia.
Uh he uh reported this discovery, not
suggesting what it was. Now, the data
came from the ASCAP array, 36 dish
antennas, each 12 meters across out
there in the desert scrublands of
Australia, away from too many
interfering radio noises. And what they
detected was a very brief burst. We're
talking 30 nanosconds of radio traffic
overall with the main part only three
nanoseconds
perhaps even less because the
instruments couldn't really narrow it
down to less than three nanose that was
the resolution the time resolution of
the instrument itself
now one of the things that the team were
look on the lookout for wasrbs
fast radio bursts first discovered by
Frank Lurmer uh using the dish, the
parks telescope in Australia. Uh many of
these have been detected since and they
seem to be at least two different types,
short and longrbs,
these strange bursts of radio energy
from the distant universe. And we don't
really understand what they are.
It could be that they are from highly
magnetic neutron stars, super dense
collapsed star cores. At the end of
their life, a supernova will explode,
crush the core down to form a neutron
star. And
these get spun up to enormous rotation
rates as a result of the conservation of
angular momentum during the collapse.
And that can create the most incredible
strength magnetic fields. And uh the
term magnetar has been coined for these.
We're talking magnetic fields billions
of times stronger than the magnetic
fields we have here on earth. Um now
these things are immensely powerful and
create some very strange physics
accelerating matter to enormously high
speeds. And it could be that these are
associated with these strange fast radio
bursts. We're not entirely sure. The
telescopes were able to try to use the
radio images they had to
paint a picture of the source of this
peculiar burst. And they got this.
Now, there's some background distortion
in there going on. And you have this
sort of uh strange
not quite a horseshoe an asymmetrical
horseshoe shape right in the center
there. This blurred curved distorted
image. Um and you can see that shape is
present in a lot of the background
distortions as well. That's because the
telescope was unable to
focus effectively. It's an array of
telescopes and they all had to be
pointed um at the source, but pointing
parallel at a nearby source that is
moving across the sky creates this sort
of elongated arc shape out of a point
source. So very difficult to interpret.
What it did suggest though was that the
source was very close to Earth, just
2,800 miles away from the telescope. And
that was interesting. It gave them a
direction in the sky to go look and they
could try to triangulate.
And with a location in the sky, it was a
matter of trying to eliminate possible
sources of interference.
And the database came up trumps with
relay 2,
a satellite that NASA had launched in
1964,
a communications satellite. There was a
a version called Relay 1, launched in
1962 that was used to relay the first
pictures from Japan to America of the
Summer Olympics in Tokyo that year. And
Relay 2 was an updated improved
experimental version uh taking the
program one step further. But it was uh
launched up in ' 64
and 3 years later had to be abandoned.
The mission was deemed concluded, but
that was because all its instruments had
failed. Now, this is an artist's
impression of space junk floating around
in Earth orbit. We're not suggesting
that the satellite was destroyed. It's
been aimlessly orbiting around in space
since 1967,
doing virtually nothing.
So, how come this satellite was suddenly
the source of this amazing fast burst of
radio waves?
Uh, of course, this brought out all
kinds of theories, including the fact
that it had been captured by aliens. Um,
someone always brings aliens into every
discovery these days, it seems to me.
Um, but the most likely is that it was a
static electrical buildup on the skin of
the satellite caused by radiation and
the solar wind. uh and that this
suddenly decided to arc from one point
to another internally and the electrical
discharge was what had caused the uh
emission of this burst of radio waves.
Another possibility though is that it
was actually hit by a very small space
rock perhaps only a millimeter across
striking the spacecraft and uh that
would have vaporized the metal skin.
Now, I don't have a photograph of this.
We don't know that that's what's
happened. So, again, we've got an
artist's impression of a satellite being
destroyed. I think this one's intended
to be being burnt up in the atmosphere.
Um, we don't know that that the
satellite was destroyed. We're not in
contact with it. So, uh, still remains
to be seen as to what had happened. Um,
maybe somebody will find a way of
getting up close and personal and seeing
if the satellite is still in one piece,
whether it was hit. [snorts] But this
all begs an important question that with
so many pieces of space junk up there,
perhaps we're going to find that this is
a source of much confusion for radio
astronomers. uh back in the day there
were fewer than 10 satellites when I was
uh learning about astronomy and uh this
wasn't really a problem but now we have
not 10 satellites but tens of thousands
and it won't be long before that number
is hundreds of thousands and if these
are going to get uh in the way of radio
astronomy it's going to be a real
problem I suspect we might have to move
our radio telescopes out beyond Earth
perhaps to the far side of the moon. Uh
perhaps deep space is going to be the
place to put them so that they're not
interfered with by all of this. And of
course, the more satellites there are,
the more the chance that one of them is
going to get struck by an incoming space
rock. Even if we manage to make them
avoid hitting each other, once one of
them gets clobbered and blown into a
million pieces, they will scatter around
in orbit and then start crashing into
each other. Um, and this is called the
Kesler syndrome and coming to low Earth
orbit near you soon, I would imagine.
Uh, we are just putting up far too many
satellites. Anyway, thanks very much for
listening and that was once around the
Relay 2 affair.